One-pager for ignore changes on updates (#1)
lsviben/crossplane: design/one-pager-ignore-changes.md

# Ignore field changes

* Owners: Lovro Sviben (@lsviben)
* Reviewers: Crossplane Maintainers
* Status: Draft

## Background

When Crossplane manages a resource, it reconciles all of the parameters under `spec.forProvider` to the external providers both 
during the creation and subsequent updates to the managed resource. But in some cases, a parameter of the external resource

> could change due it being managed outside of Crossplane. In the current state, if that happens, Crossplane will try to 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
could change due to it being managed outside of Crossplane. In the current state, if that happens, Crossplane will try to 
```

"fix" the situation, and update the parameter back to the one it has in the `spec.forProvider` as it is designed to be
the only source of truth.

> An example for this case is [AutoScalingGroup DesireCapacity], where when using an autoscaler, the parameter gets changed 

Reviewer 2: More examples could be helpful, especially the ones mentioned in the issue and reported by users.

Author: Added some. TBH they all resolve around autoscaling, but I guess this is what everybody has a problem with

> An example for this case is [AutoScalingGroup DesireCapacity], where when using an autoscaler, the parameter gets changed 
> externally. In this case, it would make sense to make Crossplane ignore this parameter during updates. For example Terraform has
> [ignore_changes].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
An example of this case is [AutoScalingGroup DesireCapacity], where when using an autoscaler, the parameter gets changed 
externally. In this case, it would make sense to have Crossplane ignore this parameter during updates.
Terraform addresses this use case with its [ignore_changes] functionality.
```

So in this document, the aim will be to introduce a solution in Crossplane for ignoring some managed resource parameters
during updates.

## Goals

* Design a functionality that allows for ignoring some fields during resource updates.

> * Try and make it as easy as possible to apply the ignoring mechanism on existing providers.

Reviewer 2: > the ignoring mechanism on existing providers

could you elaborate on this?

Author: Added some more info

## Non-goals

TBD 

## Solution

The idea is to introduce a new `ignoreChanges` string array field in the `spec` of the managed resource, that would work similarly

> to the Terraform's [ignore_changes]. The items in the array would be the field paths of the fields that should

Reviewer: ```suggestion
to Terraform's [ignore_changes]. The items in the array would be the field paths of the fields that should
```

be ignored on updates. 

```yaml
apiVersion: eks.aws.crossplane.io/v1alpha1
kind: NodeGroup
metadata:
  name: my-group
spec:
  ignoreChanges:

>     - desiredSize

Reviewer 2: Would the fieldpaths be "strings" ? 
What about nested paths, e.g. autoScaling.initialSize ?

Author: I had a mistake in my example. Actually it should have been `autoscaling.initialSize`

  forProvider:
    region: us-east-1
    clusterNameRef:
      name: sample-cluster
    subnetRefs:
      - name: sample-subnet1
    nodeRoleRef:
      name: somenoderole
    scalingConfig:
      desiredSize: 1
      maxSize: 5
      minSize: 1
    updateConfig:
      maxUnavailablePercentage: 50
      force: true
  providerConfigRef:
    name: example
```

The solution should affect just the Update part of the Crossplane lifecycle, so create and late initialization should work 
as before, even though a field is marked under `ignoreChanges`. Additionally, as Crossplane will soon support `status.atProvider`,
users will be able to observe the actual values of the ignored fields.

> #### Ignoring required fields

Reviewer 2: required for update?

Author: Extended the description there. Not sure what we can do about it except say in docs that its unadvised and to first check if the field is required for updates before ignoring it.

Required fields should not be put into `ignoreChanges`, as that could compromise the functionality of the provider. If such
a need arises, it should be handled as a special case on the provider side, and not through the `ingoreChanges` feature.

### Implementation

The implementation would be done on the provider level, so we would need to update all the providers over time to use the 
new field. 

> For providers using Upjet the solution will be to leverage Terraform's [ignore_changes] lifecycle field. So upjet

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For providers using Upjet the solution will be to leverage Terraform's [ignore_changes] lifecycle field. So Upjet
```

> generation should be updated with a step that transfers the `spec.ignoreChanges` field into Terraforms `ignore_changes`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
generation should be updated with a step that transfers the `spec.ignoreChanges` field into Terraform's `ignore_changes`.
```

> generation should be updated with a step that transfers the `spec.ignoreChanges` field into Terraforms `ignore_changes`.

Reviewer 2: This feels like we are leaking an implementation detail up to our API.

TODO: add example

For other providers we can implement a helper function in the [crossplane-runtime] repo that would use the existing code
in [crossplane-runtime/fieldpath] to unset the fields of a managed resource that are under `ignoreChanges`. That way

> provider maintainers could just use this function in the Update method, without the need to invent something themselves, of
> course unless its necessary.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
provider maintainers could use this function in the Update method without the need to invent their own solution.
```

TODO: insert some pseudocode or even real code and use it in a provider update

#### Feature Gating

Similar to all other new features being added to Crossplane, we will ship this
new policy as an alpha feature that will be off by default and will be

> controlled by `--enable-alpha-ignore-changes` flag in Providers.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
controlled by the `--enable-alpha-ignore-changes` flag in Providers.
```

This will not prevent the field from appearing in the schema of the managed
resources. However, we will ignore the `spec.ignoreChanges` when the feature
is not enabled.

### Implementation alternative considered

An alternative was considered where the above helper function which unsets fields in the managed resource would be used

> directly in the [crossplane-runtime] reconciler, and then the a version of the managed resource without the ignored fields
> would be passed to the Update method.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
directly in the [crossplane-runtime] reconciler, and then the version of the managed resource without the ignored fields
would be passed to the Update method.
```

While this solution would enable the functionality without the need to change all the providers, it has a few 
drawbacks:
* It doesn't allow for flexibility or handling special cases in the provider code, as the providers will just receive a 
managed resource which does not have the ignored fields set. There could be cases where the wish is to not update the field
on the external resource, but is useful in some other way.

> * Won't work that good with Upjet as it uses Terraform underneath which would work better with its native [ignore_changes].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Won't work well with Upjet as it uses Terraform underneath, which would work better with its native [ignore_changes].
```

## Solution alternative considered

The idea here was to do something similar to K8s `initContainers` and add a field `initProvider` to the managed resources.
The parameters under `initProvider` would be used only during creation.

```yaml
apiVersion: eks.aws.crossplane.io/v1alpha1
kind: NodeGroup
metadata:
  name: my-group
spec:
  initProvider:
    scalingConfig:
      desiredSize: 1
  forProvider:
    region: us-east-1
    clusterNameRef:
      name: sample-cluster
    subnetRefs:
      - name: sample-subnet1
    nodeRoleRef:
      name: somenoderole
    scalingConfig:
      maxSize: 5
      minSize: 1
    updateConfig:
      maxUnavailablePercentage: 50
      force: true
  providerConfigRef:
    name: example
```

The great thing about this solution is that it feels natural to add `initProvider` as we already have `forProvider`,

> `atProvider`. But on the other hand, it loses some flexibilty when it's combined with *late initialization* as the 
> when the `forProvider` field gets late initialized, we would need additional logic to have that field ignored. Which 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`atProvider`. But on the other hand, it loses some flexibility when it's combined with *late initialization* as 
when the `forProvider` field gets late initialized, we would need additional logic to have that field ignored. Which 
```

> when the `forProvider` field gets late initialized, we would need additional logic to have that field ignored. Which 

Reviewer 2: Additional logic would be ok; we should strive for the best possible API without no worrying about the implementation details first.

Author: Removed the part where additional logic would be considered an issue

brings us back to the proposed solution above. Of course, we could also not *late initialize* fields that are
in `initProvider`.

Another thing that would be bothersome with this solution is that a value is needed in the `initProvider`. A field

> cannot just be set to be ignored, without worrying about the initial value.

Reviewer 2: Do we have a some real life examples where this would be an issue?

Reviewer 2: Note to myself :) 

I think no matter which API we want to proceed with, we would use some parameters during `creation` but ignore them during `updates`. However, the main difference here is the user cannot use the default (late-inited) value if they want that parameter to be ignored and has to provide a value to be used during creation.

Author: Yeah, thats the main point. I have been trying to find some example of this but TBH I dont have the experience to know where things like this can happpen.

to Terraform's [ignore_changes]. The items in the array would be the field paths of the fields that should
be ignored on updates. 

```yaml
apiVersion: eks.aws.crossplane.io/v1alpha1
kind: NodeGroup
metadata:
  name: my-group
spec:
  ignoreChanges:
    - scalingConfig.desiredSize
  forProvider:
    region: us-east-1
    clusterNameRef:
      name: sample-cluster
    subnetRefs:
      - name: sample-subnet1
    nodeRoleRef:
      name: somenoderole
    scalingConfig:
      desiredSize: 1
      maxSize: 5
      minSize: 1
    updateConfig:
      maxUnavailablePercentage: 50
      force: true
  providerConfigRef:
    name: example
```

The solution should affect just the Update part of the Crossplane lifecycle, so create and late initialization should work 
as before, even though a field is marked under `ignoreChanges`. Additionally, as Crossplane will soon support `status.atProvider`,
users will be able to observe the actual values of the ignored fields.

#### Ignoring required fields

Required fields should not be put into `ignoreChanges`, as that could compromise the functionality of the provider. If such

> a need arises, it should be handled as a special case on the provider side, and not through the `ingoreChanges` feature.

Reviewer 2: typo
```suggestion
a need arises, it should be handled as a special case on the provider side, and not through the `ignoreChanges` feature.
```
